feat(docs): add poetry plugin reference (#830)
canonical/craft-parts: docs/common/craft-parts/reference/plugins/poetry_plugin.rst

.. _craft_parts_poetry_plugin:

Poetry plugin
=============

**Version**: 2.1

The Poetry plugin can be used for Python projects that use the `Poetry`_ build system.

Keywords
--------

This plugin uses the common :ref:`plugin <part-properties-plugin>` keywords as
well as those for :ref:`sources <part-properties-sources>`.

Additionally, this plugin provides the plugin-specific keywords defined in the
following sections.

poetry-with:
~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Type:** list of strings

> Extra dependency groups to use other than the defaults.

Reviewer: On line 30 we provide Poetry's docs about env vars, but here we assume the user is familiar with dependency groups. What do you think about linking to https://python-poetry.org/docs/managing-dependencies#dependency-groups here?

Author: I don't see a reason not to link it here.

Environment variables
---------------------

This plugin also sets environment variables in the build environment. User-set
environment variables will override these values. Users may also set

> `environment variables to configure poetry`_ using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`environment variables to configure Poetry`_ using the
```

For here and other instances of `poetry`. We have to follow the naming convention laid out by outside projects.

> :ref:`build-environment <build_environment>` key.

Reviewer: > key

I've resisted broaching this because it'll take some time to align all the technical terms, but is there an internally-consistent rule for when to use "key" and "keyword"? It appears like free variation to me.

PARTS_PYTHON_INTERPRETER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** python3

> The interpreter binary to search for in ``PATH`` or an absolute path to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either the interpreter binary to search for in ``PATH``, or an absolute path to the
```

This should help emphasize that these are separate possibilities.

Author: Agreed except about the comma (these are two objects, not two sentences). Adjusted

interpreter (e.g. ``${CRAFT_STAGE}/bin/python``).

PARTS_PYTHON_VENV_ARGS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** (empty string)

> Additional arguments for venv.

Reviewer: I feel like we could clarify which call to `venv` we mean here. I assume the one Poetry creates?

Author: I've adjusted this - it should make sense alongside the "How it works" section now.

.. _poetry-details-begin:

Dependencies
------------

Python
~~~~~~

> By default this plugin uses Python from the base when it is available and

Reviewer: > Python from the base

Can we make this "the system-level Python installation"? I feel "base" is too vague.

appropriate to use, using the same logic as the
:ref:`Python plugin <craft_parts_python_plugin>`. If a different interpreter is
desired, it must be made available in the build environment (including the ``venv``
module) and its path must be included in the ``PATH`` environment variable.
Use of ``python3-<python-package>`` in stage-packages will force the inclusion
of the Python interpreter.

Poetry
~~~~~~

By default, this plugin gets poetry from the ``python3-poetry`` package on the build
system. If that is not desired (for example, if a newer version  of poetry is
required), a ``poetry-deps`` part can install poetry in the build system. Any parts
that use the poetry plugin must run ``after`` the ``poetry-deps`` part:

.. code-block:: yaml

  parts:
    poetry-deps:
      plugin: nil
      build-packages:
        - curl
        - python3
      build-environment:
        - POETRY_VERSION: "1.8.0"
      override-pull: |
        curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
    my-project:
      plugin: poetry
      source: .
      after: [poetry-deps]

.. _poetry-details-end:

How it works
------------

During the build step, the plugin performs the following actions:

> 1. It creates a virtual environment directly into the ``${CRAFT_PART_INSTALL}``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It creates a virtual environment in the ``${CRAFT_PART_INSTALL}``
```

.. _craft_parts_poetry_plugin:

Poetry plugin
=============

> **Version**: 2.1

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this is relevant? Since this document is part of craft-parts, if a given application has this reference page then its version of craft-parts must have the poetry plugin right?

Might sound pedantic but I'm thinking about the point of view of a, say, Snapcraft user; there isn't really anything that they can do with this `2.1` since they typically don't know which version of craft-parts their Snapcraft is using

Author: Agreed and removed. I had it there because of [the plugin documentation howto](https://canonical-craft-parts.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/how-to/document-plugin.html). Do you think we should remove it from there?

Reviewer 2: yeap

Author: https://github.com/canonical/craft-parts/pull/831

Environment variables
---------------------

This plugin also sets environment variables in the build environment. User-set
environment variables will override these values. Users may also set
`environment variables to configure Poetry`_ using the
:ref:`build-environment <build_environment>` key.

PARTS_PYTHON_INTERPRETER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** python3

Either the interpreter binary to search for in ``PATH`` or an absolute path to
the interpreter (e.g. ``${CRAFT_STAGE}/bin/python``).

PARTS_PYTHON_VENV_ARGS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
**Default value:** (empty string)

Additional arguments passed to ``python -m venv``.

.. _poetry-details-begin:

Dependencies
------------

Python
~~~~~~

By default this plugin uses the system Python when available and appropriate to
use, using the same logic as the
:ref:`Python plugin <craft_parts_python_plugin>`. If a different interpreter is
desired, it must be made available in the build environment (including the ``venv``
module) and its path must be included in the ``PATH`` environment variable.
Use of ``python3-<python-package>`` in stage-packages will force the inclusion
of the Python interpreter.

Poetry
~~~~~~

> By default, this plugin gets poetry from the ``python3-poetry`` package on the build
> system. If that is not desired (for example, if a newer version  of poetry is
> required), a ``poetry-deps`` part can install poetry in the build system. Any parts
> that use the poetry plugin must run ``after`` the ``poetry-deps`` part:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this plugin gets Poetry from the ``python3-poetry`` package on the build
system. If that is not desired (for example, if a newer version  of Poetry is
required), a ``poetry-deps`` part can install poetry in the build system. Any parts
that use the Poetry plugin must run ``after`` the ``poetry-deps`` part:
```

Following up with https://github.com/canonical/craft-parts/pull/830#discussion_r1731946482.
